[KubeRay][Doc] KubeRay doc migration (5/n) (#39450)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/kuberay-gcs-ft.md

(kuberay-gcs-ft)=

> # GCS fault tolerance in KubeRay

Reviewer: Is this a new doc or have we just moved it from the kuberay repo?

Author: KubeRay originally had one, but I have rewritten everything.

kubectl get rayclusters.ray.io raycluster-external-redis -o=jsonpath='{.metadata.uid}'
# [Example output]: 864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752

# Step 6.2: Check the head Pod's environment variable `RAY_external_storage_namespace`.
kubectl get pods $HEAD_POD -o=jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].env}' | jq
# [Example output]:
# [
#   {
#     "name": "RAY_external_storage_namespace",
#     "value": "864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752"
#   },
#   ...
# ]

# Step 6.3: Log into the Redis Pod.
export REDIS_POD=$(kubectl get pods --selector=app=redis -o custom-columns=POD:metadata.name --no-headers)
# The password `5241590000000000` is defined in the `redis-config` ConfigMap.
kubectl exec -it $REDIS_POD -- redis-cli -a "5241590000000000"

# Step 6.4: Check the keys in Redis.
KEYS *
# [Example output]:
# 1) "864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752"

# Step 6.5: Check the value of the key.
HGETALL 864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752
```

In [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml), the `ray.io/external-storage-namespace` annotation isn't set for the RayCluster.

> Therefore, KubeRay automatically injects the environment variable `RAY_external_storage_namespace` to all Ray Pods managed by the RayCluster with the RayCluster's UID as the external storage namespace by default.

Reviewer: This part might be confusing for a beginner.  What's the annotation for? Why do we need the environment variable?

Reviewer: I see there's some explanation farther below, one option is to link to it.

Author: Updated https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/39450/commits/ef9ce5cf3bfbe794c54d27cfeca41ed56068e364

### Step 7: Kill the GCS process in the head Pod

```sh
# Step 7.1: Check the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable in both head Pod and worker Pod.
kubectl get pods $HEAD_POD -o=jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].env}' | jq
# [Expected result]:
# No `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable is set. Hence, Ray head will use its default value `60`.
kubectl get pods $YOUR_WORKER_POD -o=jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].env}' | jq
# [Expected result]:

> # KubeRay injects the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable with the value `600` to the worker Pod.

Reviewer: At this point, the reader might wonder why we're checking these values.  Maybe it's worth briefly explaining why the worker pod timeout should be much longer than the head pod timeout

Author: Updated https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/39450/commits/ef9ce5cf3bfbe794c54d27cfeca41ed56068e364

(kuberay-gcs-ft)=
# GCS fault tolerance in KubeRay

> Global Control Service (GCS) manages cluster-level metadata.

Reviewer 2: Is this a component of KubeRay? Can we say, "The Global Control Service (GCS) is a component of KubeRay that manages cluster-level metadata?" Or is that obvious?

Author: It is a Ray Core component.

Follow [this document](kuberay-operator-deploy) to install the latest stable KubeRay operator via Helm repository.

### Step 3: Install a RayCluster with GCS FT enabled

```sh
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml
kubectl apply -f ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml
```

### Step 4: Verify the Kubernetes cluster status 

```sh
# Step 4.1: List all Pods in the `default` namespace.
# The expected output should be 4 Pods: 1 head, 1 worker, 1 KubeRay, and 1 Redis.
kubectl get pods

# Step 4.2: List all ConfigMaps in the `default` namespace.
kubectl get configmaps

# [Example output]
# NAME                  DATA   AGE
# ray-example           2      5m45s
# redis-config          1      5m45s
# ...
```

The [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml) file defines Kubernetes resources for RayCluster, Redis, and ConfigMaps.
There are two ConfigMaps in this example: `ray-example` and `redis-config`.
The `ray-example` ConfigMap houses two Python scripts: `detached_actor.py` and `increment_counter.py`.

> * `detached_actor.py` is a Python script that creates a detached actor with name `counter_actor`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `detached_actor.py` is a Python script that creates a detached actor with the name, `counter_actor`.
```

    ```python
    import ray

    @ray.remote(num_cpus=1)
    class Counter:
        def __init__(self):
            self.value = 0

        def increment(self):
            self.value += 1
            return self.value

    ray.init(namespace="default_namespace")
    Counter.options(name="counter_actor", lifetime="detached").remote()
    ```

* `increment_counter.py` is a Python script that increments the counter.
    ```python
    import ray

    ray.init(namespace="default_namespace")
    counter = ray.get_actor("counter_actor")
    print(ray.get(counter.increment.remote()))
    ```

### Step 5: Create a detached actor

```sh

> # Step 4.1: Create a detached actor with name `counter_actor`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Step 4.1: Create a detached actor with the name, `counter_actor`.
```

#     "name": "RAY_external_storage_namespace",
#     "value": "864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752"
#   },
#   ...
# ]

# Step 6.3: Log into the Redis Pod.
export REDIS_POD=$(kubectl get pods --selector=app=redis -o custom-columns=POD:metadata.name --no-headers)
# The password `5241590000000000` is defined in the `redis-config` ConfigMap.
kubectl exec -it $REDIS_POD -- redis-cli -a "5241590000000000"

# Step 6.4: Check the keys in Redis.
KEYS *
# [Example output]:
# 1) "864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752"

# Step 6.5: Check the value of the key.
HGETALL 864b004c-6305-42e3-ac46-adfa8eb6f752
```

In [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml), the `ray.io/external-storage-namespace` annotation isn't set for the RayCluster.
Therefore, KubeRay automatically injects the environment variable `RAY_external_storage_namespace` to all Ray Pods managed by the RayCluster with the RayCluster's UID as the external storage namespace by default.
See [this section](kuberay-external-storage-namespace) to learn more about the annotation.

### Step 7: Kill the GCS process in the head Pod

```sh

> # Step 7.1: Check the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable in both head Pod and worker Pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Step 7.1: Check the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable in both the head Pod and worker Pod.
```

kubectl get pods $HEAD_POD -o=jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].env}' | jq
# [Expected result]:

> # No `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable is set. Hence, Ray head will use its default value `60`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# No `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable is set. Hence, the Ray head uses its default value of `60`.
```

kubectl get pods $YOUR_WORKER_POD -o=jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].env}' | jq
# [Expected result]:
# KubeRay injects the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable with the value `600` to the worker Pod.
# [
#   {
#     "name": "RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s",
#     "value": "600"
#   },
#   ...
# ]

# Step 7.2: Kill the GCS process in the head Pod.
kubectl exec -it $HEAD_POD -- pkill gcs_server

> # Step 7.3: The head Pod will fail and restart after `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` (60) seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Step 7.3: The head Pod fails and restarts after `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` (60) seconds.
```

> # In addition, the worker Pod will not be terminated by the new head after reconnecting because GCS fault

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# In addition, the worker Pod isn't terminated by the new head after reconnecting because GCS fault
```

Therefore, KubeRay automatically injects the `RAY_gcs_rpc_server_reconnect_timeout_s` environment variable with the value **600** to the worker Pod and uses the default value **60** for the head Pod.
The timeout value for worker Pods must be longer than the timeout value for the head Pod so that the worker Pods don't terminate before the head Pod restarts from a failure.

### Step 8: Access the detached actor again

```sh
kubectl exec -it $HEAD_POD -- python3 /home/ray/samples/increment_counter.py
# 2023-09-07 17:31:17,793 INFO worker.py:1313 -- Using address 127.0.0.1:6379 set in the environment variable RAY_ADDRESS
# 2023-09-07 17:31:17,793 INFO worker.py:1431 -- Connecting to existing Ray cluster at address: 10.244.0.21:6379...
# 2023-09-07 17:31:17,875 INFO worker.py:1612 -- Connected to Ray cluster. View the dashboard at http://10.244.0.21:8265
# 2
```

```{admonition} The detached actor is always on the worker Pod in this example.
The head Pod's `rayStartParams` is set to `num-cpus: "0"`.
Hence, no tasks or actors will be scheduled on the head Pod.
```

> With GCS fault tolerance enabled, we can still access the detached actor after the GCS process is dead and restarted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With GCS fault tolerance enabled, you can still access the detached actor after the GCS process is dead and restarted.
```

Note that the fault tolerance doesn't persist the actor's state.
The reason why the result is 2 instead of 1 is that the detached actor is on the worker Pod which is always running.
On the other hand, if the head Pod hosts the detached actor, the `increment_counter.py` script yields a result of 1 in this step.

### Step 9: Delete the Kubernetes cluster

```sh
kind delete cluster
```

## KubeRay GCS fault tolerance configurations

The [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml) used in the quickstart example contains detailed comments about the configuration options.

> ***It's recommended to read this section in conjunction with the YAML file.***

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***Read this section in conjunction with the YAML file.***
```

### 1. Enable GCS fault tolerance

* **`ray.io/ft-enabled`**: Add `ray.io/ft-enabled: "true"` annotation to the RayCluster custom resource to enable GCS fault tolerance.
    ```yaml
    kind: RayCluster
    metadata:
    annotations:
        ray.io/ft-enabled: "true" # <- Add this annotation to enable GCS fault tolerance
    ```

### 2. Connect to an external Redis

* **`redis-password`** in head's `rayStartParams`:
Use this option to specify the password for the Redis service, thus allowing the Ray head to connect to it.

> In the [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml), it uses an environment variable `REDIS_PASSWORD` to store the password from a Kubernetes secret.

Reviewer 2: I can't follow what "it" is in the sentence.

Do you mean to say, "Ray uses the `REDIS_PASSWORD` environment variable in the ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml to store the password from a Kubernetes secret."?

Author: Updated https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/39450/commits/c2ec123ef358aebbb835a15afc40744d5e05f471

    ```yaml
    rayStartParams:
      redis-password: $REDIS_PASSWORD
    template:
      spec:
        containers:
          - name: ray-head
            env:
              # This environment variable is used in the `rayStartParams` above.
              - name: REDIS_PASSWORD
                valueFrom:
                  secretKeyRef:
                    name: redis-password-secret
                    key: password
    ```

* **`RAY_REDIS_ADDRESS`** environment variable in head's Pod:
Ray reads the `RAY_REDIS_ADDRESS` environment variable to establish a connection with the Redis server.

> In the [ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-cluster.external-redis.yaml), it uses the `redis` Kubernetes ClusterIP service name as the connection point to the Redis server. The ClusterIP service is also created by the YAML file.

Reviewer 2: Similar comment to above.

Author: Updated https://github.com/ray-project/ray/pull/39450/commits/c2ec123ef358aebbb835a15afc40744d5e05f471

    ```yaml
    template:
      spec:
        containers:
          - name: ray-head
            env:
              - name: RAY_REDIS_ADDRESS
                value: redis:6379
    ```

(kuberay-external-storage-namespace)=
### 3. Use an external storage namespace

* **`ray.io/external-storage-namespace`** annotation (**optional**):
In most cases, ***you don't need to set `ray.io/external-storage-namespace`*** because KubeRay automatically sets it to the UID of RayCluster.
Only modify this annotation if you fully understand the behaviors of the GCS fault tolerance and RayService to avoid misconfiguration.
Refer to [this section](kuberay-external-storage-namespace-example) in the earlier quickstart example for more details.
    ```yaml
    kind: RayCluster
    metadata:
    annotations:
        ray.io/external-storage-namespace: "my-raycluster-storage" # <- Add this annotation to specify a storage namespace
    ```

## Next steps

> * See the {ref}`Ray Serve end-to-end fault tolerance documentation <serve-e2e-ft-guide-gcs>` for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* See {ref}`Ray Serve end-to-end fault tolerance documentation <serve-e2e-ft-guide-gcs>` for more information.
```

> * See the {ref}`Ray Core GCS fault tolerance documentation <fault-tolerance-gcs>` for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* See `Ray Core GCS fault tolerance documentation <fault-tolerance-gcs>` for more information.
```
